did thank you so much for being here
today it was just awesome revisiting you
know all of your books and articles Etc
that I had read throughout the years and
you had once said that you did your
medical training in Reverse you started
training as an immunologist then a
biologist and then you got your medical
training so how did you get here today
so I am obviously I'm an oncologist uh
by training I treat cancer patients my
specific area of interest is blood
cancers uh leukemia and lymphomas but
really my interest is is in novel
Therapeutics um I develop new therapies
I make new drugs as I like to tell
people and that is actually the the the
main area of my my interest and that
spans not just leukemia lymphomas but
also breast cancer Immunology a huge
effort in osteoarthritis in cartilage
regeneration um and blood stem cell
Regeneration all of which seem totally
disconnected but are actually are deeply
connected um so your question is how did
I get here um I just you know I'm not
going to repeat a big resume but I
started off as a student at Stanford
where I had the opportunity to interact
with Paul Berg Paul was the person who
created recombinant DNA um he was the um
the person who basically uh invented the
technology that allows us to take two
pieces of DNA from two completely
different uh creatures or even an
artificial piece of DNA and Stitch them
together into one single piece and that
allows us to do all sorts of things
including cloning I then went to Oxford
um where I trained in Immunology another
big uh mile poost where I trained with
Alan Townsen from Allen I picked up the
idea of you know that medicine and
science um biology are sort of
intricately linked like two strands of
DNA uh a yin and a Yang then I came to
medical school where I actually began to
sort of really explore these ideas in
more detail worked as a postdoc in uh
David scad's laboratory at Harvard
Medical School that's the non-resume
part of my history because it tracks the
intellectual Journey that that that I
that I took is there something that
excites you most about cancer research
right now there are many things that are
exciting about cancer research I'll just
lay out a few of them and I'll try to
organize them a little bit so that uh we
can understand them I mean so the
fundamental basis of cancer uh treatment
research or whatever you want to call it
is prevention cancer prevention and um
it's been traditionally underfunded but
of course it gives you the most bank for
the buck and for a long time um we
didn't understand some fundamental
features about cancer prevention namely
um there was possibly a universe of of
cancer-causing agents that we weren't
trapping these are agents that people
have been thinking about for a long time
inflammatory agents things that cause
inflammation but inflammation's kind of
a clown car kind of word you know if you
open it all sorts of various things come
out and you don't know what's what's
real and what's not real so we have
begun and by we I mean the the
scientific Community there two or three
recent important papers
one from Charles swanton's lab in in in
London couple of others from other
Laboratories around the world where we
have begun to unpack uh a new
understanding of how the the link
between inflammation uh possibly between
inflammation and obesity and cancer
because there's been always this
suspicion that somehow we were missing a
series of um very important human
carcinogens and we didn't know how how
they worked I liken this to a little bit
like uh you know in this typology I
would say that these are unknown
unknowns uh so cancer you know to find
carcinogens it was very easy to find
known unknowns so you know the mechanism
um you know that they cause DNA damage
they cause mutations but you don't know
the chemical so that's a Known Unknown
you know the mechanism by which it works
so you can find the chemical but then
there's a universe of of as Donald
ramwell famously put it unknown unknowns
um and these are things where you don't
even know how the how it causes cancer
but but there's an epidemiological link
um so for instance air pollution um was
an unknown unknown um we knew that there
was an epidemiological link people who
happen to live in highly air polluted
areas carbon or cold tar exposed areas
got cancer but no one knew exactly how
and why uh these things cause cancer we
are beginning to understand that um how
does obesity cause cancer again we're
beginning to understand that how does
Diet relate to cancer risk we're
beginning to understand that so so the
whole of cancer prevention is now moving
towards these really mysterious unknown
unknowns and I think that's super
exciting in cancer prevention now in
early detection which is the middle of
the pyramid um uh there's a whole new
series uh of things that are going on
some of which involve AI so can we use
new technologies uh potentially
generative out algorithms to figure out
people who are at higher risk U do we
screen them differently um do we find
early cancers does that help big big big
questions uh that will be answered in
the next decade or so in the field of
cancer treatment um that's the area that
I work most closely in I mean the
exciting thing of course is the use of
um I would say not just the immune
system but the body's entire natural
physiology to um to act against cancer
that ranges from the use of the immune
system obviously uh new medicines that
unleash or reactivate the immune system
to recognize cancer uh C T cells so te
cells that have been genetically
engineered to kill cancer it's a field
that I work in very closely um the use
of diets um in combination with drug
therapies to um potentially attack
cancer cells um the use of um new
technologies including uh Technologies
that have been fast forwarded by AI um
to find new medicines new drugs against
cancer um and so all of that I think is
in in the arena of cancer treatment um
is is where where there's a lot of
exciting stuff going on and one of the
things that you have been very concerned
about is making sure everyone benefits
from the great you know Health Medicine
breakthroughs that are happening and so
you mentioned cartis Cell Therapy would
love to hear just a little bit more
about what are you doing there what is
it about sort of democ critizing access
to this especially you're work in India
yeah so um I founded a company called
imun which is going to uh bring the
first C therapies to India CTI therapies
are basically genetically modified te-
cells uh which are then Unleashed
against cancer it's incredibly complex
technology you basically have to extract
te- cells from the body uh genetically
modify them using a virus and then uh
return them to the body and weaponize
them and return them to the body now to
attack cancer cells you can imagine that
this technology you know obviously
evolved out of very many um incredible
discoveries here but we um I and two of
my colleagues decided that we would try
to democratize it you know these
therapies cost cost around um or I
should say are priced around uh about
$500,000 in the United States and as a
friend of mine once said half of uh
Infinity is still Infinity so it's
Infinity for for uh someone in India
child in India and so we decided that we
would try to figure out and cut every
one of those costs and now I'm talking
about costs not price and we've been
able to um bring the technology to India
that was the first part of the journey
um we've treated about 25 patients so
far with u astonishing data cured uh
children who would Otherwise Die of
leukemias and lymphomas in fact our cure
rate is exactly the same as the Cure
rate that cares have in the United
States this is for very particular
leukemias and lymphomas um this is the
first CTI we have several in the P
pipeline but really the the trick has
been to create a sense of
self-confidence if you can set a rocket
to the moon from India 1.3 billion
people we can make a CTI and we have so
um and you know there are CES now
available in China they're available in
several other countries and so one of
the efforts has been to use all all the
tools available especially um you know
the kind of hacking engineering that we
can really have talent in in India to
reduce the cost and increase the
accessibility so it's a journey we've
just started it but it's probably one of
the most exciting things I met one of
the children that uh that we we cured
and it was probably the most important
medical moment in my life that's amazing
thank you for that work W awesome in
addition
to being in a Journey about
understanding cells what they mean in
the human body what how you can trigger
them how you can evolve
them we also of course have an
artificial intelligence part of you know
your gesture one General Reflections on
AI but also with Reflections the
medicine and cancer sure uh it's a
little intimidating to talk about AI to
you and ARA because you know it's like
we're bringing cold to Newcastle but
anyway um I can give some general
Reflections but let me Focus later more
importantly on medicine um so my general
reflection of the AI of course is that
it's one of the transformative
Technologies it's one of those
accelerators I have absolutely no doubt
that it's going to be and has already
started becoming uh showing itself as a
it has all the signs it may not have
achieved all of its potential but as all
the signs of it being one of those
accelerated I often think about uh
remember the game Snakes and Ladders so
um you know I think of accelerators as
ladders so all of a sudden you're sort
of trudging along you know 1 two 3 4
five six and you land on seven and
there's a ladder it takes you to 18 um
so um it may not have achieved all of
its potential and certainly has not but
it it has all the sign the smell the
feel of one of those accelerators a
recommon in DNA an accelerator you know
language of course the perhaps the most
important human accelerator that um ever
existed but it has you know it has it
has the capacity I I use those two
examples very particularly language has
a generative component it you know
language as I often say we think in
language but then language dictates how
we think and it in fact many people have
pointed out that this recursion is
extraordinarily important AI has that
feel about it um recombinant DNA I also
used again is a very particular example
because Rec common and DNA allowed us to
change who we were again a recursive
quality about it AI has this recursive
quality we're making things that change
again go to go back to my fundamental
definition of humans we're making
something that will change who we are AI
allows us to make those things faster um
and in fact itself is something that
will change who we are and so it has
this recursive quality that's why I
chose those two incredible accelerators
but as those two particular examples uh
AI in medicine okay um well thus far
very early days there's a lot of hype
around it um but very early days um uh
recently a flotilla of papers uh one in
nature one uh in various other major
Publications that talk about sort of you
know
basically
absorbing uh and beginning to curate
medical knowledge which would be just
the first step so in other words you
know things that we couldn't do before
which is um using AI as a diagnostic
companion because it has absorbed
virtually all of medical knowledge very
important step in in terms of
Diagnostics so you walk into uh an
emergency room with a rash and you know
you're the physician that is there has a
certain set of medical knowledge and all
of a sudden that has now become uh I
would not just quadrupled or quintupled
but now the entire Archive of medical
knowledge is is available to him or her
and and so obviously one step and and
we're moving in that direction but in
terms of what's exciting to me and we
can talk more in depth about that is not
just the capacity to ingest uh the
entire Corpus of knowledge and then uh
incorporate that that Corpus into
diagnostic decisions into medical
decisions but the generative aspect of
it which is to say can we make something
completely new in medicine uh based on
on AI uh alone
and there I think we and I'm actually
involved with all some of this myself
we're doing some things that we haven't
ever done before so for instance um I'm
involved in an effort um we're trying to
make drugs um completely out of
computational alone so the old way of
making drugs was to use basically
empiric ways or use nature as your as
your guide and uh you know highly
successful aspirin comes from nature
incredible drug then came a time when we
were using rational drug design um and
some synthetic chemistry so a great
example of rational drug design in
synthetic chemistry is the drug lipor so
um you know the pathway by which heart
attacks myocard infarction occurs was
tracked down to um elevations in
cholesterol in particular um you know by
Brown and Bishop that then led to the
identification of the receptor and the
and Lipitor is a mechanism by which you
know we can change the Dynamics of how
much cholesterol is in your the harmful
kind of cholesterol is in your blood so
so that is an example of rational drug
design we are in we're entering
potentially a third phase uh in terms of
drug design in which we don't even need
some of these empiric tools in other
words we can design a drug potentially
completely using computation alone and
generative AI is an incredibly important
component to this and the first such
drug when it appears will change the
entire Paradigm of drug Discovery um
because we'll be able to use presumably
generative AI to to create not just one
drug but a universe of drugs and just to
help you understand the problem um AI
has already solved as you know with the
help of computational biology it's
already solved our capacity to fold
proteins in space this was this is a
huge problem and this was taken on by
Deep Mind the program is called Alpha
fold it's freeware I basically use it
every
day Pi could you explain well to put it
simply Alpha fold is a revolutionary AI
program that can predict the 3D
structures of proteins this is a really
big deal because knowing the structure
of proteins is crucial for understanding
how they function and that in turn has
all sorts of applications in fields like
drug Discovery and medical research
before Alpha fold predicting protein
structures was a really timeconsuming
and difficult process but now it's much
more efficient and accessible thanks to
this technology it's one of the most
important advances in AI in recent years
and it's already having a big impact on
science and medicine but that solves
only half the problem right so you've
got the protein that you want to Target
but now you want to take a chemical a
small molecule or another protein and
you want to dock it into the first one
so it's a you've got the lock but now
you have to find the key and again then
we're beginning to use ai ai helped us
Define the shape of the lock but now ai
is helping us Define the shape of the
key and once we find out how to make the
key there will be a whole universe of
materials I'm not even just talking
about drugs a whole universe of
materials that can interface with
Biology um whether they be nanomaterials
whether they be proteins uh new
chemicals small molecules whatever it
might be that is a complete that's a
ladder in Snakes and Ladders and
certainly a major ladder per medicine so
you know I think that's what's exciting
to me um both the both the knowledge
base in the Corpus and then of course
the generative aspects making new things
that weren't there before when people
think
about which risks should we be taking to
make acceleration in science to be
making acceleration in medicine um
because the the normal kind of
unfortunate dialogue is said well we
should just get all that without any
risks and you can't get it without risks
can't get it at all you can't get
acceleration which risks do you think
would be wise for people to consider
taking like that we as as as Humanities
as scientists or should lean and taking
more the lack of public sharing of of
medical data um and I think we've leaned
a little bit strongly towards privacy
and in fact there is a free lunch here
um I think modern cryptography has
achieved the enough that it would it can
make it really really tough not
impossible but really really really
tough um to to to De encrypt uh uh
private information but the sharing of
that information has become incredibly
difficult um you know we can't do that
across genetics we can't do this across
risk you know AI will soon allow us to
mine medical information extremely well
uh even unstructured medical information
medical notes um we may be able to Fig
figure out um who's at a great risk for
um uh chronic kidney disease uh in the
future or or you know losing their
eyesight in the future um in order to do
that we have to be able to access these
unstructured medical notes which is an
incredible Corpus of knowledge and um
you know someone like you I mean you
know obviously would realize that that
the only way to do that this is
information and the sharing of
information so I think that's absolutely
crucial one of the places this is going
to take us is um in song the cell you
spoke of cell manipulation and you
talked about creating sort of the new
human and I was excited about one of the
examples you gave because you talked
about um bone marrow transplants in my
previous work at do something we did um
bone marrow drives where we got college
students to swab their cheeks so they
could enter the bone marrow registry and
you know we saw hundreds and thousands
of lives being saved you know one of my
very best friends donated bone marrow to
a seven-year-old and you were talking
about how yeah this seven-year-old is is
now a new human because they have DNA
from the bone marrow from someone else
but that's like Child's Play when we're
talking about bone marrow donations like
what do you define as the new human and
and and where could It Go as we're
seeing AI enter the equation well I
think part of the reason I used I used
the word new human in this book as a
provocation because I wanted to provoke
the idea that in fact we've been making
what I call new humans all the while and
in fact every time we've made them
there's been a spectre of dismay and
extraordinary amounts of caution and
extraordinary amounts of alarm and
perhaps that's a good thing these are
these may be helpful things because they
allow us to calibrate they're rats they
allow us to calibrate you know the reach
of Technology with the potential
important pieces that uh stop
Technologies so I'll give you one
example when the first blood
transfusions were attempted some people
thought that you know the person who
would be who would come out of that
blood transfusion would be a different
person because uh you know this was in
another time when blood transfusions
were less successful more important
example when the first baby was born
with through IVF uh Luis Brown you know
Lu Brown's parents got hate mail saying
you know you have you have basically uh
changed the mechanism of human
reproduction and thereby changed what
what it means to be human Luis broud is
not human and yet she is you know there
she is being as human as she is now she
has children herself and there are
100,00 more than 100 thousand several
100 thousand babies born uh with IVF and
you don't even know similarly when the
first born Mar transplants were were
done people said well you know you're
making some kind of bizarre Chimera
between one human and another and now
you know we walk through a hospital Ward
and there are some people with Bor Mar
transplants and some people without B
Mar transplants there people walking
around with the kidney from the heart
from another person so you know in the
biological sense we've been creating the
new humans for a while and so I wanted
the word new human to be a provocation
for people to begin to understand that
this is not sort of suddenly today's
news this news has been around for a
while we've dealt with these ideas for a
while and in fact I would say we haven't
dealt badly with them U we've dealt with
them with a caution um we've created
boundaries we've created barriers we've
been generally okay um I would say our
record isn't may not be an A+ but it's
certainly not a not a c minus in terms
of our capacity to regulate to
understand what the limits are what the
boundaries are uh in this now I'm not an
expert on how far AI can push these
boundaries and make them basically uh
push them beyond our control and I I'll
I'll flip this question back to both you
and both you area and Reed in terms of
answering this question but for me what
the history of
biology and thereby the history of human
intervention Technologies teaches us is
that we haven't our our track record
isn't that bad um and so I'm I'm hopeful
the alarmist concerns that we have
around um how AI will come and take over
everything can be mitigated by our our
understanding of what what we have done
in history I don't know i' flip this
question back to you Reed and back to
you Arya I'd say that the um that the
the question around thinking
about you know what is humanity become
like this is one of the parallels with
an AI it's like when the printing press
came out people were like oh my God this
is going to destroy you know certain you
know key elements of humanity what going
to be eroding our cognition because it
it it makes us less dependent upon our
memory um you know it'll create
misinformation that's FL that's flooding
around you're like well that sounds like
a lot like what some of the people are
saying about AI right now and yet I
think it's hard for us to imagine the
humanity that we we have become uh and
aspire to be collectively you know all a
billion of us without books without
without written things and how books
kind of evolve us and then the question
of course is is it as it gets closer to
to not just the tools we use but who we
are like you know genetics and so forth
it becomes a lot more you know kind of
you know kind of challenging to think
through and I think we will want want to
evolve deliberately our genetics it
starts easily of course as everyone's
noted with like well let's fix key
highly dysfunctional genetic diseases
like why have those as as suffering but
then it gets to kind of questions around
like well what if you had genetics that
allowed you know kind of higher on
average you know IQs or higher on
average longevities or other kinds of
things and and then people argue against
it by saying well but you're start
choosing blue eyes and you're like well
we do have that bad human instinct too
we're going to have to try to keep that
and create all kinds of diversity in in
what we're doing we have to navigate all
that but that that evolution is part of
what who we are as human beings and what
we need to do and so um so I think it's
it's important to address and not just
kind of back into but I don't think
we're going to be able to fully address
it until we start kind of Dipping our
toes into the water um I don't know Arya
if you think something
differently well I mean I remember Reed
we were we were at like a a 10 person
dinner and we were going around the
table talking about you know if you
could right now get 10 extra points of
IQ you know would you do that would that
be ethical and I think all these
questions are so tough and and Sid you
know you yourself um talk about the
difference between desire and disease
and like certainly curing disease is
okay but even now it's so interesting um
you know when when you talk about kids
getting clear implants and then you know
the deaf Community is upset because they
feel like a piece of their culture is
going so what is interesting to me about
it is sort of the intersection of
culture and what is human like will
different cultures and different
societies come out differently on this
um because something is more more
important to them but I I definitely
think that the next decade at least
we're hopefully going to be dealing with
um diseases and curing them and then and
then the desires will come and I have I
have no doubt that we're going to be
doing things in 15 years that today just
seem beyond the pale and in in 15 years
seem pretty normal yeah I I I I've
talked a lot about this in the two
recent books the Gene and the cell uh
this distinction between disease and
desire and another way to put it is the
distinction between enhancement and and
uh emancipation so emancipation from uh
terrible things that happen to us
enhancement being going somehow Beyond
emancipation um uh uh doing something
that is that is that is desirous to us
um and um the I suppose the good news is
that genetic Technologies at least and
cellular Technologies um are pretty
limited uh because of biological
constraints based on everything that we
know you cannot simply aside from
raising the Hideous plus Prospect of
eugenics um you cannot simply
genetically manipulate yourself into
having even blue eyes because that trait
is controlled by a 100 odd genes not
that particular trait but most complex
human traits uh including most complex
human traits uh that range from I'll
give you one example human height uh is
highly genetically determined tall
people tall tend to produce tall
children short people tend to produce
shorter children so we know that there's
a genetic component but if you dissect
the genetics it turns out to be hundreds
of genes so and this has become a pretty
understandable pattern most human traits
um are controlled by hundreds if not
several hundreds of genes and it's not
easy to manipulate several hundreds of
genes it's just not technically easy it
may become at some point of time the
difference I think between all of this
and um computational Technologies is
that you can enhance without
manipulating genetics so you can enhance
and I would say you can and if you want
to it in sort of using Richard Dawkins
terminology you can change the meme
without changing the gene in other words
and you can potentially change cultural
memes without changing human genetics in
other words your children will inherit
it well they will inherit the idea but
they won't inherit it through biological
mechanism they inherit it through a
cultural social mechanism Etc that is
what is to me both fundamentally
extraordinarily interesting about some
of this some of the some of the the
universe that's going around in Ai and
its intersections with genetics um but
it's also stic quite frightening because
um you know I hear the voices I think
the voices are real I don't think I you
know I'm I may be an optimist in general
but I I you know I don't think that I'm
completely sanguin about this
interaction uh the social genetic
interaction the gene environment
interaction that will almost certainly
be
disrupted by by AI you know Gene
environment interactions are crucial to
uh to the to us to humans now ai is of
you know often people use
disruptive um to me what's interesting
is that AI is going to disrupt human
gene environment interactions and by
that I mean so many different things um
I'll give you a a very a very colloquial
example as it were um you know AI has
the capacity to disrupt one of you know
one of our many interactions as you Gene
environment interactions as you can
imagine is our conception of of what is
beautiful some of that is is determined
uh by um you know social memes some of
it is determined by um history some of
it is determined by um genetics some of
it is determined by you know um a whole
variety of things AI has the capacity to
disrupt that idea of what is beautiful
and so in in in a way that's what
bothers me what what bothers me is is is
ai's capacity to
disrupt not just generally speaking
technology uh but the way humans are you
know going back to this idea that that
creativity if if AI starts competing or
disrupting or squashing uh the human
creative impulse I think we're in deep
deep trouble on the other hand if AI
causes an if if fluoresence in human
creativity then we're not in deep
trouble I think we're we're it it's
going to be very beautiful uh to go
where we're going well one of the things
that I think is going to be the
structural deep rub here
is the need we have as a tribe and as a
species to have broad ranging
experimentation and taking some risk
together with individual desires to
having controlled and contained downside
the the big concerns here are
maintaining diversity empathy uh
equality um many things that define us
as humans not just the you know sapiens
as I remember is not just a a
technological term it it it also
involves and I said this right at the
outset it also involves this whole range
of creative processes that we that we
can do and and are able to do um and
this range of creative processes uh is
possible I suspect because of these
other qualities that we have you cannot
disrup you cannot take the you cannot
take empathy out of the creative process
you can't write a novel I think without
having you know without having empathy
or or generating empathy in characters I
know read we once spoke about you know
you know one of your criteria for
reading a novel is within the first few
pages can you do you have empathy for
one of the characters and if you do you
continue to read I'm just maybe I'm very
broadly speaking you can't write a novel
without the feeling of empathy you
cannot write a book you cannot create
art without appreciating that human
beings are different by the way this is
one of the reasons I think that the one
of the reasons that fascist art turns
out to be such bad art um but um but you
can't uh you can't you can't you can't
create the most beautiful things we
create without understanding that you
know you and I are different and you
might you might hate something um and I
might like something but anyway um but I
think that's that's the rub the rub is
you know can we continue to be um homo
creativist and and will that be enhanced
or will that be uh somehow
disrupted uh by by Ai and potentially by
by by genetics by by biology ology
biological intervention and if if either
of those two happens and especially if
those two happen in collusion I think
there's there's a prospect of very bad
things happening and on the other hand
you know of course if there's an a
florescence um that would be a wonderful
thing all 100% agree and that reminds me
of another thing that we cannot let this
podcast go without um asking you what is
humanity what are we now what are we
turning to be what are the levers you
know one of the things as know Sid from
our conversations um you know is I and
we tend to say hey we're we're we evolve
through our technology you know whether
it's you know uh clothing glasses fire
or medicines and soth because I think
one of the things that I I I love about
you is you're is many things is a
scientist and a humanist how would you
put the kind of from a your perspective
science
perspective that question of what is
humanity
what Journey are we on what are the ways
that we are you know kind of evolving
not in the purely just genetic you know
adaptive sense but in the this question
of bringing up with recommed DNA
bringing up with science persec them
bring up with technology what's that
what's that lens forward on on Humanity
yeah I mean it's a deep question Reed
and you and I've talked a lot about it
um you know I think that the it's not a
coincidence that our species as Homo
sapiens uh we concentrate a lot on the
homo but really should be concentrating
a lot on the sapiens the sapiens being
we are a species that is capable of of a
a particular kind of thinking and I
think that particular kind of thinking
is uh now has become a a word in in
common use uh you know we use the word
generative Ai and we'll talk about that
night but but it's important to realize
that
humans are capable of generative
thinking and generative thinking is very
important because it's a particular kind
of thinking it's not just logical
deduction it's not just putting two and
two together but it's the capacity to
say here is fire I'm going to use fire
which is hot to make uh food and by
changing the quality of food I'm going
to change the quality of what I produce
and I will cultivate a new new kind of
crop which I couldn't previously eat but
now I can eat because I can transform it
using fire now that seems like a a
trivial example but it totally changed
the the course of human history there
were foods that we could not eat which
with the use of fire um we were able to
eat all of a sudden and those were the
very foods that we could cultivate and
once we could cultivate them we could
create homes around them and create and
those homes became villages and you know
I'm sort of recapitulating a particular
kind of history but it's a generative
history it's again it's not it's not
just logical deduction it's the fact
that we are you know we have a creative
impulse inside us the question you asked
is is very important now that you now
that we understand that you know that
the sapience part of it is is a is a
creative or generative impulse to make
new ideas come around um the question is
what are humans and what do we look
forward and what we look forward to well
one thing that humans are becoming and
perhaps our definitionally who we are is
that we are a species that uniquely has
the capacity to control our destiny
potentially by interfering with our own
Evolution we are a species that unlike
any other species that we know and maybe
we'll encounter one in some other planet
but unlike any species that we know has
has the capacity to drive our own
evolution in other words we have a
recursive process uniquely recursive
process which allows us to do things to
ourselves that change ourselves that
spans the gamut of Technologies from
recommon and DNA changing our genomes
changing the genomes of ourselves
changing the genomes of crops around us
all the way to generative AI in which we
create new ways or new machines um that
can come close to or are coming close to
the way we generate our our thoughts so
that in some ways that is becoming the
definition of who we are of course
there's a biological entity of who we
are um and it can't be ignored you know
there will be people on your podcast who
will absolutely talk about how important
it is to not neglect those biological
impulses you know we are also hormonally
driven for lied uh creatures that uh you
know are capable of love and envy and
passion and terrible crimes um and
incredible inventions there'll be people
on and and that is absolutely true I I
there's no disagreement there but I
think what my perspective on this which
perhaps is you know which I share with
with you is that we uniquely have the
capacity to be creative to create to
generate ideas and those ideas are
unique in the sense that unlike any
other species those ideas affect the our
capacity of defining who we are so it's
almost a recursive definition that no
other species have we make ideas that
change who we are that's what human
beings are um and that's uh
simultaneously the most exciting and
also the most dangerous thing uh that we
can do to ourselves to make ideas that
change who we are and and part of I
obviously we've talked about this a lot
I completely agree there's accelerance
but it's what we've been doing already
as the you know history recapitulation
and so it's not it's not like oh
suddenly it's just the accelerate now
sometimes you know differences of of
degree are differences of kind but it's
kind of the question about how to
navigate it and it's one of the things I
think is if I would guess what would be
the next the most important thing Vis
technology over the next 20 to 100 years
it's how are we doing that generative
self-evolution in this and it applies at
the individual level applies Society
level applies the humanity level applies
the planet level the kind of scientist
humanist is a very important voice in
this kind of shaping because we're not
going to get we're going to get you know
all kinds of you know humanity is a Caff
of perspectives and it's like well which
of these voices do we orchestrate into
the into the chorus into the song of of
who we become I think re you have a
particularly important perspective on
this as well because you know I think
that the the the word's exactly right so
there's a cacophony of voices here um
and the we need to separate out from
that cacophony the parts that fit into
the bigger song and the parts that that
should actually probably be left behind
from the bigger song but the important
pieces that there are I think there are
there are I would say four or five
important parts of that song in other
words I'm I'm playing a game I'm playing
a game in which um you know a spaceship
is cast out into space and you have you
you you can put five members on it and
they're going to discuss they're going
to be concerned with discussing the
future of human beings who who would you
choose and who would you Chuck from that
spaceship right so so here here here my
choices I'd love to hear yours but here
are my choices my choices we need the we
need a pure humanist uh probably
a philosopher moral philosopher um we
need a historian because someone needs
to remind us what uh where we we have to
go uh where we've come from sorry we
need a um and the third person is I
would say we need a pure scientist
presumably a biologist a computer
scientist or some of some sort um but at
least a pure scientist I'm just sort of
using the term abstractly but then there
are two other people that I would put in
that ship and they are I call them
translators the first translator is a
scientist humanist someone who can speak
the two languages um and the second is
the is another translator a technologist
humanist um and may they may be the same
person U but we need two translators
because the pace at which we're moving
uh it seems to me that we need to at
least understand this Pentagon of
Dimensions where did we come from which
is the historian's dimension what should
we be doing which is the uh moral
philosopher the humanists idea uh
hopefully tinged by an understanding of
human history uh number three is um what
capabilities what what does science look
like um um and remember I you know that
the i' I've embodied in the in the pure
humanist and the historian the wealth of
literature and music and um and uh
you know the wealth of art um I've I've
tried to embody them in in those so so
so so so please don't uh you know as you
very well know my wife's an artist I'm
not I'm not excluding I'm not excluding
that someone who who who make cave
paintings then we need someone to tell
us what science looks like um and you
know in that person is embodied perhaps
the physicist the tech you know computer
scientist the and then we need two
translators who who will basically make
peace between the the Three Kingdoms
um and so that so that would be my my
idea of of of who to put on that
spaceship well it's an excellent
question um you know part of the thing
that you and I have also talked about a
bunch is how uh questions of like which
questions you ask really shape the
journey and is actually kind of the
important progress in science and
everything else so I will also um you
know kind of essay a response and you
know the translator thing I'll have to
think about a little bit as the kind of
key role I was kind I think myself I
would hope the hack would be is that
every
would bring their translational
capability with them yes maybe yes it's
an absolutely essential characteristic I
agree with the humanist and a
specifically philosopher as a version of
humanist obviously there's a large scope
of humanists everything from artists
anthropologists everything else
literature um you know even you know
kind of uh you know scholar of religion
and so forth there's a whole range but I
think the philosophy is the orientation
and you know obviously sweet spot in my
heart because my own Oxford studies I
also agree with the pure scientist
although I think um in this case
partially because of War I'm getting the
other three I wouldn't say uh computer
scientist um I think
biological uh would be like anyone in
the kind of biom medicine area I think
would be the area where I would Orient
and you know no no disrespect the
physicists and many other folks here uh
partially because of that uh routing now
as the kind of the entrepreneur
reinvention um I will you know get
historians everywhere scoffing and I
will admit the historian from the five
person
spacecraft um and uh I'll add a
technologist inventor because part of
that is specifically that creation of
new technology which is a very um you
know kind of rare skill set just like
kind of the elite you know kind of uh
scientists you know like yourself or Bob
Langer or other you know Eric Lander
other people I would consider you know
as as part of this um uh you know on the
pure scientist and kind of bi ological
uh side even with like for example
Lander's back background of mathematics
so one would be the the technologist and
Venture I think another one would be
some kind of and the interesting
question is is kind of social leader
because bringing in the the the the D
dynic of of of us as a tribe because we
have this as Homo sapiens homo we're
both individuals and we're all tribal
creatures we the kind of these where we
these bizarre dualities and you have to
bring the tribal thing intoo um and so
that you know somewhere in that I don't
think that's a politici especially
modern politicians don't think big
enough but like you know someone who is
a kind of a humanist group leader and I
um like I think there are some very
enlightened religion people that could
fit in that category I would want to be
very selective of which ones because
there's some also very unenlightened
ones but the but the right enlightened
ones from multiple different religious
Traditions could be could be quite
interesting there's one seat left I
think yes one seat left again partially
because it's so much of the forward
motion the way to the future is the
journey forward I might take um kind of
a science fiction writer I'm not I'm
dying to hear who you who you would
choose uh as your science fiction writer
well um you know there's there's a set
uh Kim Stanley Robinson is interesting
um you know uh I've actually been
recently rereading David bren's uplift
series yes yes I know them very well I'm
I'm a big fan of exactly so I just kind
of thinking through uh you know uh and
you know parti I'm dating myself because
these are the people I was reading when
I was reading science fiction like every
day you know these are the folks there
I'm sure there's more modern folks that
that would also be you know well thought
to be included but you know uh Neil
Stevenson I mean there's a stack of
folks that I could I could think of of
of as interesting people but well this
is the fun this is this is I think a fun
game for all your listeners well you you
can pick five seats or six seats and
then you could have a a vigorous debate
about who to put in put in the five
seats um but but I think I think um I'm
moved to thinking and and sort of humbly
thinking I I should say that it's um
it's probably important to have a tribal
leader otherwise this will become
another cacophony on a spaceship instead
of a cacophony on on Earth yes um I I I
think I agree with that with that that's
the translation function totally key I'm
just hoping that may see in the
individuals you can get that as a as a
feature they can carry their own they
can carry their own little translator
[Music]
baggage on a slightly more light-hearted
note we have a set of questions we ask
each of our guests they're fun you can
answer at at brevity or length as
entertains you or as moves you and so I
will kick it off is there a movie song
or book that fills you with optimism for
the future there's a book uh which I
love which is uh Richard rhod's of the
making of the atomic bomb it it seems to
me that that uh it would it would be a
kind of a depressing book but what it
does is it reminds you that after the
making of the atomic bomb there was an
incredible International response um and
so that book is a is a great reminder
that we can do terrible harm
but then we can backtrack our way and
learn from that harm that we've done and
that we learn empathy from that harm
there's the last section of the book
which has a testimony of many of the
people who were at Hiroshima and
Nagasaki is you know you you you moved
to tears because we learn from that
experience what not to do so anyway that
would be my my book of choice a fat book
though so I fair warning I was gonna say
adding to the list but now concerned go
read for sure well actually one of the
things I love about it is it's the look
look part of of walking and running to
the future is you will stumble and you
will error but correction of that is
important and I think that's a great
kind of note of optimism added curiosity
knowing you um because I just want to
add specifically also a piece of artwork
um uh yes so you know I I mean I I'll
change tax here I so I I assume I'm not
allowed to use my wife's work which
contains an incredible sense of
explosion and optimism I I happen to
marry be married to Sarah one of the
great artists of Our Generation but I'm
the I'm the uh the follow on spouse but
um I love the I I love Jackson Pollock's
work for instance um and um you know um
I would nominate any one of his many
many many paintings for this so um that
would be that would be my my my choice
um for what is worth I'll throw in a a
great uh a piece of music uh All of Me
by Billy Holiday all right but uh this
next question it can be personal
professional you can take it wherever
you like but is there a question that
you wish people would ask you more often
oh
um I I there so how about how about this
how about I tell you a question that
which people won't ask me I have the
worst sense of direction that I know in
a human being and I think that I
actually and I'm quite serious about it
I think I actually have a development I
think there's something in my brain that
didn't develop uh correctly we have a we
happen to be U have a house um which is
uh on the ocean and there's an exit that
that we're supposed that I'm supposed to
take and I've gone through this to this
exit I think uh more than 500 times uh
off the highway and every time I'm
taking the exit I think to myself am I
100% sure that I should be taking this
exit so don't ask me which where we
should be going read experience this
personally because um because we were
walking around in in in Japan and and it
was became very clear to to read that I
was the I was the uh I was the person
who was almost certainly to lead us in
the wrong direction very funny so where
do you see progress or momentum outside
of your industry that inspires you so
I'm going to give you a non
technological or or or or or answer
outside technology I think our debate
around technology is actually become
quite sophisticated so I think our
capacity to have a real back and forth
between the sort of the tech te no
optimists and the Techno pessimists has
become more grayscaled um and um and I
think the discipline o of arguing or
figuring out and you know people can
call it bioethics or you know AI ethics
or whatever you want to call it I think
that debate has become more
sophisticated and I I I I've started
actually enjoying it I've started
listening to it enjoying it I started
thinking about it I I think that that's
that's it's kind of it's It's a
sophisticated debate and I think you
know as I said SAR it's got a history to
it but but I'm enjoying this debate and
I I I think we will learn so much from
it and and I still learning so much well
so bringing it back to your field the
podcast is called possible uh can you
leave us with a final thought of what is
possible to achieve if everything breaks
Humanity's way in the next 15 years and
what's the first step to get there well
I think what's possible is um you know a
peaceful coexist
uh in a in a diverse uh multi- faceted
Community which uh retains creativity
empathy um creates art um makes new
technologies cures disease um and uh not
just lives longer but lives a Deeper
Life a life of of deeper uh of deeper
satisfaction I think that's the limits
of possibility and I think if the V of
of any technology is aligned in that
direction that's the right Vector to be
aligned
[Music]
towards possible is produced by Wonder
media Network hosted by AR finger and me
Reed Hoffman our show rer is sha young
possible is produced by Edie Allard
Sarah schle and Paloma Moreno Jimenez
Jenny Kaplan is our executive producer
and
editor special thanks to Katie Sanders
suria yalamanchili SAA Sapa Ian Ellis
Greg biato and Ben relis we'd also like
to thank Yan Ma and little monster Media
[Music]
Company